Roundstart Species Design Guidelines (#477)
space-wizards/docs: src/en/space-station-14/character-species/guidelines.md

**Being a popular species does not grant an automatic right to being upstreamed to Wizard's Den**. That said, popular species often gain momentum behind them that can iterate, sometimes repeatedly, until a good proposal is found.

All species must be considered fairly and equally for proposal, implementation and maintenance. Provenance is not a replacement for quality.

# Rules Summary

1. A species must have a **distinct identity** that is notably different in theme from the other species available on Wizard's Den.
2. A species must represent a **new feature or opportunity for technical improvement**.
3. A species must be, at least conceptually, reasonably balanced with the other species available on Wizard's Den.
4. A species must not be "othered" via its mechanics. Mechanics that directly encourage speciesism will be rejected.
5. A species must not be "deliberately" bad or unusually challenging to play (except for Plasmamen).
6. A species must not represent a new challenge to moderation and adminning.
7. A species must be technically feasible to implement and maintain.

> 8. A species must not circumvent or be fatally held back from greatness by a common gameplay element of Space Station 14.

Author: "A species must not entirely circumvent one or more common gameplay elements of Space Station 14."
"A species must not be designed with a specific, critical flaw that, without that flaw, would make the species overpowered compared to other species".

Think it needs to be two rules.

Circumvention of a mechanic is an IPC ignoring any sort of hunger/thirst-like mechanic. Leads to lopsided design that is hard to keep in line and fun.

Overpowered-but-flawed is roundstart skeletons. They are fast, immune to spacing and whatnot, but they can only heal with milk. Huge limitation which works for a free agent but would have constant issues as crew.

> 8. A species must not circumvent or be fatally held back from greatness by a common gameplay element of Space Station 14.

Reviewer: Probably a good idea to split it into two yea. Maybe compress it down to "A species must not be designed with a specific, critical flaw that would make the species overpowered if removed".

At time of proposal, concept art, references and demonstrations are welcome to help illustrate this identity. If this species is played on downstreams or SS13 servers, showcasing their identity via a video is also welcome.

Remember that the most invested person in a character or creature design is always the creator. It is always on the proposer of a species to prove why a species is sufficiently interesting to be a candidate for upstream.

### Rule 2: New Features and Tech Improvements

A species **must** represent an opportunity for evolving the Space Station 14 codebase. This can involve either a completely new feature or a significant remix of an existing feature, representing the opportunity for code improvement.

It is not uncommon for a species to be proposed that is almost or completely achievable via YAML and assets alone. These species are often ideal for downstream servers, but would not meaningfully improve the ability for Wizard's Den to iterate on the game and make it better for everyone. This is more important than supporting every niche within the wider Space Station 14 playerbase (see The Golden Rule, above).

> In certain circumstances, a species that demonstrates a sufficiently interesting use of current mechanics, potentially in service of some other in-development content, **may** be granted exemption from this rule (see The Golden Rule above).

Reviewer 2: I think in general I agree with the current formulation.
It does not say anything about having to introduce a new mechanic, but that it needs to be *interesting* mechanically.
I would remove the "achievable via YAML" part because that is a bad way to measure mechanical complexity. A few lines of yaml can do a lot, and it might be that the component you need has already been written.

 A species **must not** be intentionally designed in a way that makes them specifically good or bad at one particular job on the space station. For example, a short, bearded humanoid species fond of drink and industry should not be, by design, better at being a miner or salvager than any other member of the crew. An ability they have that is useful in those roles should also be useful in other roles.

 It is acceptable for a species to be *emergently* better at some aspect of a job. For example, a species with a tail that can pull things might be better than average at moving crates around the station, which is valuable to a Cargo team. But this is a skill that is useful broadly, rather than being focussed on one particular discipline.

 A species **must not**, under **any** circumstances, be designed in a way that makes them unusually good or unusually bad at combat. Combat is an essential part of Space Station 14, and species with wildly divergent abilities make the act of balancing it extremely difficult.

 ### Rule 4: Speciesism

>  Speciesism is banned on Wizard's Den in its entirety. As such, species **must not** directly encourage the "othering" of those that play those species - for example, causing health problems in those around them, or being incapable of socializing or interacting healthily with the rest of the crew.

Reviewer 3: I think this should be expanded to "no encouraging breaking Wizden rules" instead of just "no encouraging speciesism'. Sure, speciesism is very bad, but I don't think that a species that promotes ERP would be accepted either.

 ### Rule 5: Deliberately Challenging Species

 Species **must** not be designed in such a way that a new player, picking a random character and rolling that species, would have an excessively negative experience due to lack of game knowledge. This **does not** mean a species cannot have a notable, potentially deadly, downside. However, that downside **should** be recoverable from, presented obviously to a player who has no prior context of that species, and teachable within the game by other players.

 For example: a species suffers from oxygen poisoning. This means they must wear internals at all times, except in specific circumstances where oxygen is not present. This species **should not** punish the player by dying rapidly if their internals fail or are removed, and, if they do die, they **should** be revivable.

 If a species is significantly challenging to play as, compared to normal round-start species, the following rules apply:

>  - It **must not** be able to be selected round-start by new players.

Reviewer 4: I would say this can be allowed, but have guidebook open for that species when a new player selects it.

Author: ![Uploading 7i6e3v-2589314892.jpg…]()

From time-to-time, a species that was previously added to Space Station 14 may be proposed for review by the maintenance team. This review would focus on that species' current quality and conformance to the above rules, and propose remediating remedies, if appropriate, to bring the species up to standard.

## Significant Modification to a Species

Additions and improvements to previously-created species are always welcome, but significant modification to a species involves significant modification to players's characters, which may be controversial.

Consultation should be taken from players before deployment of significant re-designs or changes in concept to a round-start species are merged to stable. This may involve seeking feedback from players on the test server about the changes, making players aware of the changes via the Discord, and so on.

## Removal of a Species

A species is the first and most important choice a player makes when building a Space Station 14 character. As such, removing species from the game effectively involves deleting players's characters. This sort of change can be controversial, and must be handled responsibly.

> Outright removal of a species that has been deployed outside of an event (such as April Fool's) or a test-merge to Vulture **must be** agreed to by a maintainer vote, after consultation with the Wizard's Den player community. Alternative remediating steps should be considered first, and full deletion should be considered a last resort.

Author: This is the only time I'm straying onto actual ways-of-working policy changes and it's a deliberate choice. This allows maintainers to safely front "maybe we should remove dwarfs" and allow for a way to handle this without a giant public argument.

## Why These Guidelines Exist

Selection of species is the first and most important decision a player will make at character creation. Space Station 14 is a game that encourages emotional connection and roleplaying, and this means that, once a character is created, it is very challenging for maintainers to "un-make" that character by removing the species from the game, or even significantly altering that species, should its design be found wanting. As such, species must be held at a high standard to be accepted.

In addition, species are a key aspect of the game's themes and setting. A level of consistency is required to ensure that the world remains immersive and engaging for all players.

Finally, species are often the cause of lengthy debates, especially for new species proposals. This policy document exists to guide discussion of species and ensure that this time can be better spent.

## The Golden Rule

Wizard's Den maintainers always have the final say on the content that they do or do not want on upstream. Everything in this document can be overruled by maintainer consent.

> If Wizard's Den declines to accept a new species, this should not be considered a snub of the species concept as a whole. The objective of Wizard's Den is to provide a 'vanilla' codebase for Space Station 14 servers run by many other groups, as well as providing a fun experience for players on the Wizard's Den servers specifically. Because of Wizard's Den's role as an upstream, it can't usually accept content as easily as many downstreams can. Likewise, because Wizard's Den is considered a 'vanilla' variant of Space Station 14, there are many great potential concepts for a species that are too unsuaul or specific to one way Space Station 14 is played (such as on high role-play servers, highly chaotic or comedic servers, and so on) to be suitable for Wizard's Den specifically.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If Wizard's Den declines to accept a new species, this should not be considered a snub of the species concept as a whole. The objective of Wizard's Den is to provide a 'vanilla' codebase for Space Station 14 servers run by many other groups, as well as providing a fun experience for players on the Wizard's Den servers specifically. Because of Wizard's Den's role as an upstream, it can't usually accept content as easily as many downstreams can. Likewise, because Wizard's Den is considered a 'vanilla' variant of Space Station 14, there are many great potential concepts for a species that are too unusual or specific to one way Space Station 14 is played (such as on high role-play servers, highly chaotic or comedic servers, and so on) to be suitable for Wizard's Den specifically.
```

## Porting from SS13 and SS14 downstreams

From time-to-time, a species with significant popularity either on notable Space Station 13 servers or Space Station 14 downstreams may become in-demand for players on Wizard's Den.

**Being a popular species does not grant an automatic right to being upstreamed to Wizard's Den**. That said, popular species often gain momentum behind them that can iterate, sometimes repeatedly, until a good proposal is found.

All species must be considered fairly and equally for proposal, implementation and maintenance. Provenance is not a replacement for quality.

# Rules Summary

1. A species must have a **distinct identity** that is notably different in theme from the other species available on Wizard's Den.
2. A species must represent **new or substantially remixed design ideas**.
3. A species must be, at least conceptually, reasonably balanced with the other species available on Wizard's Den.

> 4. A species design must not directly encourage speciesism or other rule-breaking will be rejected.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
4. A species design that directly encourages speciesism or other rule-breaking will be rejected.
```
Weird wording.

For example, if an aquatic species has to live inside a water-filled suit at all times, they should still have the ability to wear a variety of outfits on top of that suit so they can express themselves like every other species. 

This rule also covers other forms of rule-breaking. For example, a species could be themed around demons, but specifically theming a species around certain succubus/incubus tropes would obviously be too problematic to be suitable for Wizard's Den.

### Rule 5: Deliberately Challenging Species

Species **must** not be designed in such a way that a new player, picking a random character and rolling that species, would have an excessively negative experience due to lack of game knowledge. This **does not** mean a species cannot have a notable, potentially deadly, downside. However, that downside **should** be recoverable from, presented obviously to a player who has no prior context of that species, and teachable within the game by other players.

> At a minimum, when picking a species which could be challenging to a new player, a guidebook entry exists to help that player play the species, and that guidebook entry **must** appear when that species is picked for the first time, and this page **must** be focussed on assisting the player with how to play the species, not simply being relegated to an encyclopedia entry on that species's mechanics.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
At a minimum, when picking a species which could be challenging to a new player, a guidebook entry exists to help that player play the species, and that guidebook entry **must** appear when that species is picked for the first time, and this page **must** be focused on assisting the player with how to play the species, not simply being relegated to an encyclopedia entry on that species's mechanics.
```

For example: a species suffers from oxygen poisoning. This means they must wear internals at all times, except in specific circumstances where oxygen is not present. This species **should not** punish the player by dying rapidly if their internals fail or are removed, and, if they do die, they **should** be revivable.

If a species is significantly challenging to play as, compared to normal round-start species, the following rules apply:
- It **must not** be able to be selected round-start by new players without clear warnings and tutorialization in place.
- It **should not** be able to be picked if a random species is chosen for a midround ghost role. 

> - It **should** be given careful consideration on its impact on certain team antagonists, such as Nuclear Operatives, if that species is played as one of the team. (For example, a species that cannot wear shoes may be significantly disadvantaging to a Nuclear Operative team that can't provide that species with access to slip resistance othererwise.)

Author: ```suggestion
- It **should** be given careful consideration on its impact on certain team antagonists, such as Nuclear Operatives, if that species is played as one of the team. (For example, a species that cannot wear shoes may be significantly disadvantaging to a Nuclear Operative team that can't provide that species with access to slip resistance otherwise.)
```

5. To bring legacy species from before this policy document was created up to the standards of this policy document.

It is important to avoid burning time and energy on species maintenance without having a clear understanding of what you want to achive. Historically, debates about species and their design have taken up a lot of discussion time, often because those involved in the discussion have different goals for the changes.

## Work With The Players

Players are often responsible for conflicting and hard-to-undestand feedback on elements of design. However, they as a group have far more time and far more experience playing with and around a species than any maintainer hoping to successfully improve that species.

Consulting and working with players when wanting to change a species has several clear benefits:
1. Community buy-in to potentially difficult design changes can be sought, preventing issues when changes are made.
2. Ideas can be generated that are more diverse than what can be thought up by the maintainers.
3. Ideas can be tested and "run past" players before potentially lengthy maintenance work is done, preventing wasted time.

> In general, maintaining a place for interested players to talk about the changes, where players can keep track of what is happening with the changes, and where feedback can be sought, is a good idea. This is a good use of a Discord thread.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In general, maintaining a place for interested players to talk about the changes, where players can keep track of what is happening with the changes, and where feedback can be sought, is a good idea. This is a good use of a forum thread on our [developmet design discussion section](https://forum.spacestation14.com/c/development/design-discussions/65). Discord threads are not recommended as they may get sidetracked easily or be hard to read back afterwards, but they can work.
```
